Why do planets have rings? Well, let's
start with this amazing image of Saturn.
You have the planet in the center with
its lovely pastel-shaded clouds in belts
around it. And then outside of that, you
have the amazing ring system. Very
complicated. You can see there are main
rings. There are gaps between and there
lots and lots of individual ringlets
building up to make the entire ring
system. You can also see the shadow of
the planet on the rings at the lower
left there. But this was all first
observed by Galileo. He turned his
primitive telescope to the heavens and
looked at Saturn in 1610 and he noted
that it seemed peculiar. It appeared to
have handles like a giant jug.
But in 1612, he was astounded to see
that they had
disappeared. In 1616, four years later,
he noted that there was a pair of blobs
either side of Saturn, and he put this
down to perhaps a couple of very large
moons. This may have accounted for why
they had vanished. Maybe the moons were
hidden behind Saturn when he'd done the
previous observation. Seems reasonable.
But we now know that it's down to the
fact that Earth and Saturn orbit the Sun
in tilted orbits. They're not in the
same
plane, but Saturn's rings are in its
equatorial plane and lined up with the
the orbit of the planet around the sun.
So as the relative tilt of Earth and
Saturn changes year on year, we see
Saturn from a different aspect and we
get either the wide view of the rings
gradually narrowing down to a very thin
disc indeed and in fact in 2025 they're
going to be completely edge on to us and
will vanish completely before opening
out again the other way. It's amazing
how thin they are. And we now know that
they are composed of millions of tiny
dirty snowballs, chunks of ice, bits of
rock and grit, little specks, all
orbiting around Saturn. Everything from
these tiny specks of dust all the way up
to objects the size of cars or buses,
all orbiting independently around under
the gravity of their host planet.
And we in fact know that all of the
giant planets have rings. This wasn't
discovered until the space probes went
out to the outer solar system. In
particular, the Voyager probe going out
to Uranus and Neptune. But we now know
that Jupiter and the outer ice giants
all have ring systems, but none are
anywhere near as spectacular as Saturn's
and are very hard to
observe. So what makes these rings?
Well, perhaps a broken up comet, icy
asteroid, or small icy moon may have
approached too
close and been shredded by the giant
planet's gravity. We saw this with comet
Schumaca Levy 9. This was torn apart by
Jupiter's gravity as it made a close
approach and became a whole series of
small cometlets shown in that lower
photograph. And then in 1997 on the very
next orbit these crashed into Jupiter
one after another creating the upper
image there with the giant smoke ring on
Jupiter. Each cometlet creating its own
impact zone in the atmosphere of
Jupiter. But of course Jupiter is so
enormous and made entirely of gas that
it was soon able to brush off the
impacts and return to normal. No sign
that Schumaca Levy 9 had ever
existed. Now a more oblique approach of
the comet might have missed the
atmosphere and seen these cometlets end
up forming a new ring around Jupiter and
that would have been an interesting
observation. Uh perhaps we will get to
see that one
day. But this is all down to the force
of gravity. So let's have a look at how
that works. Isaac Newton taught us that
a moon in orbit around a planet is
attracted to the planet according to a
force F which is equal to a constant
G times the product of the masses m1 and
m2 the mass of the primary object and
the mass of the small moon divided by
the square of the distance between them.
And this controls the movement of
planets
around the sun. It controls the moon
moving around the earth and of course
how apples fall from trees, but it also
accounts for the tides of the earth. And
it's often explained incorrectly that
it's just the force of the moon pulling
the water up into a bulge according to
the law of gravity. And that really
isn't quite the whole
story. If you look at the situation, the
water on the earth, each water molecule
feels a pull from the moon and that can
be from the center line straight towards
the moon or from the poles it pulls
directly in the line of sight to the
moon which is either slightly downwards
or slightly upwards as on this diagram.
And so you can split
the vector of the force, the diagonal
line of sight into a horizontal
component and a vertical component. The
horizontal component goes left to right
in the direction of the moon in both
cases. But the vertical component pulls
down from the top or up from the bottom.
And so it squeezes the water away from
the poles.
But I want you to think a little bit
further and just spin this diagram in
your head so
that the blue ring representing the
earth is horizontal not vertical as it
is on the diagram. And the same will be
true for the near and
far edges of the earth. They will pull
in towards the center. So what actually
happens is that rather than forming a
bulge on the side of the moon or even a
donut around the equator, you actually
form a depression all around the
extremities of the earth away from the
direct line of sight through the center
of the earth and the center of the moon.
So that water is squeezed away from
there down to create those two bulges. I
hope that makes sense. It's quite hard
to explain that one, but it's important
to understand it, I
think. Well, we're talking about rings,
not tides, but it is the tidal effect
that is responsible for disrupting
objects that get too close to giant
planets. If you go within 140,000
kilometers of Saturn, the stress of the
tides induced in the object will
potentially exceed the strength holding
the object together and it will be torn
apart and hence creates all those ring
particles. And this limit is called the
rush limit. If you go inside the rush
limit, you are in trouble. And we can
calculate exactly where that's going to
be. Let's have a look. If we have a moon
orbiting around a planet, and in our
example, it's 10,000 km away, and the
moon is a diameter of 2,000 m, so 1,000
m
radius. Well, we know that the force
obeys Newton's law there. F= G, M1, M2
over R 2.
Well, that's fine, but the near side, if
you had a particle sat on the near side
of the moon towards the planet, it would
be a little bit closer. You would have
to adjust the value of R, replacing it
with the big R, the distance between the
moon and the planet minus the radius of
the planet. And so, you would be
dividing by the square of that. So, it
would be a dividing by a smaller number,
it will be a bit greater. And on the far
side you have to have R plus R. So the
force is a little bit
lowered. So the difference in the force
gives you a tension in the
object. If you subtract the two, you get
the rather hideous expression at the
bottom there. GM1 M2 over R minus R all
2 minus GM1 M2 over R + R all 2. Well,
we can factor out the g1 m1 m2 there and
still quite an ugly expression. So,
let's try and simplify it. If we take
that expression and we attack the bottom
of it with all the squared terms in,
there's a trick. Multiply the first part
by r + r all squared top and bottom.
Multiply the second part by r minus
little r all squared top and bottom. And
because you're doing the same thing to
top and bottom, that's multiplying each
of those terms by one. That's fine. But
it creates on the bottom of the
expressions the denominators in the
square brackets for both of them the
same thing. It's actually r + r 2 * r -
r 2 for both of them. So we can common
that up and that's the
trick. We can also replace with R - R *
R + R all squared. That's the same. So
if we do that, it's still looking a
little bit ugly, but we can then expand
the resulting expression that we have on
the top of R + R 2 minus R minus little
R all squared. If we expand that,
multiplying it out, doing the squares of
the things in round
brackets, we get the next line with the
red and blue terms. So we
get big r 2 + 2 r little r plus little r
2 minus big r 2 + 2 big r little r -
little r 2. And the big r squares, well,
you got a positive and a negative, so
they cancel. and the little r squares
also cancel and we just get two lots of
two r out of it. So that simplifies well
and we get four big r little r on the
top. We've still got to do something
with this uh rather ugly piece that's in
the square brackets on the bottom
though. But we can what we can use is
the a + b * a minus b r rule which tells
us that that those two terms multiplied
together will be a^ 2us b^ 2 and we can
recognize that that's what we've got on
the bottom of our expression. So we can
replace big R minus little R * big R +
little R with big R 2 minus little R
squared inside the square brackets all
squared.
Okay. Few. Now we need to apply an
approximation. And this is another neat
trick because big R 10,000 km is much
bigger than little R which was 1,000 uh
1 km 1,000 m hugely greater. The square
of them is vastly greater. It's just
enormous. So we can just ignore the
subtraction of little r squared. Replace
big r^ 2 minus little r^ 2 with just big
r 2. A very good
approximation. And so we do that and the
piece in the square brackets then
squared just gives us r^ 4. So our
expression simplifies to four big r
little r over big r^ 4. And you can
cancel an r top and bottom and get 4 *
little r / r cubed. So the tension in
the object finally is revealed to follow
an inverse cube
law. An inverse cube is a very steep
curve. So if you go a little bit closer,
if you have the distance, you would
multiply the tension by eight. If you
went to a third of the distance, you'd
multiply it by 3 cubed, which is 27. So
the tension would get absolutely
enormous as you approach the planet. And
this is of course why this is such an
aggressive shredding
process. It's also you notice it depends
on little r the size of the moon. And so
the larger the moon is the more the
tension will be. And so tiny little
objects are safe. They don't get
shredded. So the ring particles being
small up to the size of cars or buses
are fine, but anything larger than that
is suffering a considerable amount of
tension and is likely to get torn apart.
So if you go within a certain figure
where the tension exceeds the strength
of your object, then you will get
shredded. And that's why the large
planets have
rings. And just to finish off, let's
talk about Mars and its moons Phobos and
Deemos shown
here. Mars' moon Phobos orbits around
Mars quite closely and in the wrong
direction. It's in a retrograde orbit.
And retrograde orbits are bad. They tend
to result in you spiraling in towards
the planet and Phobos is indeed doomed.
It will in about 50 million years time
either crash into Mars or quite possibly
get shredded as it goes within Mars's
fairly small rash limit leading to a set
of rings around Mars. Now sadly uh 50
million years is such a long time that
we're never going to see it but uh
eventually Mars might look more like
this and have its own set of rings. But
of course eventually even the the ring
particles suffer
and will interact with the thin
atmosphere the exosphere around the
planet and they gradually spiral in very
slowly accelerating down and burning up
in the atmosphere. So rings are only
temporary but what isn't? Thanks very
much for listening.